The Great Dining Room, which is formerly served as a banquet hall, is situated in the most representative part of the Palace, overlooking the streets Zachodnia and Ogrodowa. The room’s décor is sumptuous, inspired by the art of courtly Baroque. The whole interior design has a clear ideological program, emphasized by its monumentality, splendor and symbolism. The walls are lined with oak paneling and decorated with cartouches, ribbons, bows and garlands of fruit, which were a symbol of wealth and affluence of the owners. Running above them is a frieze, separated from the lower part by a rippling cornice. Its ornamentation consists of sculptures of polished plaster, elegant stucco and paintings ? oil on canvas technique. Painted at the request of the Poznañski family by Samuel Hirszenberg in 1903 in Munich, they represent the art of Post-Impressionism with elements of Symbolism. Two of them, entitled “Arrival” and “Muse,” are placed high above the door on the western wall, while the other two (“Woman with Fruit” and “Farewell”) on the north wall above the fireplace.
The interior design was installed during the last reconstruction of the Palace, which started after 1900, shortly after the death of the head of the family, Izrael Poznañski. Therefore, symbolism of ornaments of the north wall is dominated by elements referring to immortality, passing and the cycle of rebirth in life. Panels of the frieze depict a scene of a farewell, a peacock as a symbol of immortality appears both in the image and in the form of the decorative stained glass figurine over the fireplace, and the motif of wreaths in capitals and pilasters of the fireplace body is a metaphor for the seasons and symbolizes the transience of life and rebirth.
In turn, the allegorical figure compositions placed on the western wall personify labour and harvest, industry and commerce, as well as fortune. The pair placed on top of the tall cupboard is an allegory of industry and trade. It features two figures on a boat, leaning against a sphere that symbolizes the globe. The man is holding a bundle of cotton and a ribbon, while the woman has a winged wheel propped against her thigh. The duo is accompanied on both sides by other representations situated on twin columns. The allegorical “Harvest” depicts a woman holding a bundle of plants, perhaps the goddess Demeter, and a man leaning on a plow. The allegory of “Fortune” represents Fortuna, the goddess of good luck and prosperity, and a bearded man with papyrus in his hand, standing in the boat. The figure of the bearded man is sometimes interpreted as a representation of Izrael Poznañski, who plays the role of a pioneer and messenger opening the way for the development of trade in the east.

