Henryk Hirszenberg, professionally known as Izrael Hersz, the youngest of the three brothers – artists, was born in 1885 in Łodź. He showed a unique talent from an early age. Nothing is known about his education (only that he is most likely to have studied at the École des Beaux-Arts in Paris in the 1930s), but from the beginning of the twentieth century he had his paintings exhibited. He also participated (with success) in utilitarian architectural competitions in the interwar period. In 1906, at the age of 21, he won the first prize in a competition for the design of a girls’ high school in Liepaja in Latvia (Courland), which would suggest that he might have studied at the Technical University of Riga. The information was published in the prestigious St. Petersburg magazine Sodchiy. In collaboration with Marek Fajne, a graduate of the School of Crafts in Łodź, he went on to win other prizes, specializing in designs of private homes and public buildings. Henryk Hirszenberg’s style evolved both in terms of form and style, from historicism, through early modernism, to the mature modernist forms of the late 1930s. The artist also designed residential interiors and sculptural details for his own architectural designs in the Art Deco style. He worked in Poland, Russia, the Soviet Union and then in Poland again, after illegally crossing the Polish-Soviet border in 1921. 
	In 1922, he joined “Srebrny wóz” [Silver wagon], an artistic group founded by Witold Wandurski and Karol Hiller. In 1923, he returned to design, presenting his drawings of “utilitarian architecture” at the international exhibition “Young Art.” In the 1920s, he created award-winning (albeit rarely implemented) architectural designs, including sepulchral sculptures, such as the original tombstone of Maksymilian Kohn in the Jewish cemetery in Łodź. Hirszenberg was a member of the Łodź association of architects, employed in Oscar Kon’s Widzew factory complex in 1925-1928. Co-founder of the sports club Widzewska Manufaktura, he probably designed the club’s stadium, later acquired by the Widzew Łodź football club. At the end of 1937,he went to Palestine, following in his brother’s footsteps. He was also a theoretician of architecture and urban planning. He died in Israel, in Tel Aviv (where he lived) in 1955. His legacy is one known, completed object – the primary school in Ruda Pabianicka, as well as many architectural designs, though only in draft form. He was a creative and resourceful artist, who valued – as an architect and an urban planner - functional and pragmatic solutions.
