Leon (Léon, Leo) Hirszenberg, born in 1869  Łódź, brother-in-law of Henryk Glicenstein. This outstanding (albeit now largely forgotten) symbolist painter started his artistic education in his brother’s studio in Łódź, as well as in a private school in Munich, though the latter in unconfirmed. After studying there for , Leon returned to Łódź in the mid-1890s. Around that time, he his works were exhibited in the Zachęta gallery (in 1896 - “The Head, A Study in Oil;” in 1897 - “In the Kitchen”), as well as in Łódź, at Bartkiewicz’s Salon “Laundress, Doormats;” “In the Kitchen, in the Park, a Study”). He It is likely that in 1896 he also had another work showcased, “Girl with a Cat”, reminiscent of “Girl with Chrysanthemums” by Olga Boznańska (1894). After returning to France in 1902, Leon donated his “Study” for the lottery of the Polish Society of Literature and Arts, founded in Paris in 1897. As part of his involvement with Polish artistic circles in the French capital, he traveled to Concarneau, as evidenced by the title of one of his works exhibited in 1903 at the Society for the Encouragement of Fine Arts (along with works such as “Inspiration,” “The Lady,” “An Old Woman’s Head,” in 1904 “A Landscape at Dusk,” in 1905 “Deep in Thoughts,” “By the Fireplace”). In Krakow's Society of Friends of Fine Arts, between 1905 and 1906, he exhibited “Evening,” “Memory” and 3 themes from Brittany. Like many other Polish artists, who traveled to Brittany or had already been working there, such as Władysław Ślewiński or Mela Muter, in 1905 he settled in the fishing village of Perros-Guirec, located in a different part of Brittany than Concarneau. One of the local landmarks was a castle, Château de Costaérès, built in 1896 at the request of a Polish engineer and mathematician, Bruno Abdank-Abakanowicz. 1904 proved to be a breakthrough for Leon. At the Salon of the Société Nationale des Beaux-Arts in 1904, he presented his painting “A Breton Idyll.” At the time, the painter declared that he had been born in Łódź, in “Pologne russe,” and that he resided in Paris at rue Campagne Première number 9. From the late nineteenth century until World War One, the building provided accommodation for many Polish artists. It is possible that the artist stayed there only temporarily, or even used the address of one of his countrymen, because several months later, at a time when he had his work exhibited at the Salon d'Automne, he gave another address, rue Madame number 69, in another part of the Parisian 6th arrondissement.
At of the same year Leon presented two of his paintings at the Salon d'Automne: “Réflexion” [Deep in Thoughts] and “A Study.” The works caught the attention of the French critic J. d'Aubrac, who mentioned their author in an article on Mela Mutermilch (Muter). As the critic wrote in Revue moderne des arts et de la vie, Hirszenberg’s oeuvre was characterized by “uniquely discreet feeling and subtlety,” and “his poetic and sensitive soul” was reflected in his works. Several of his other paintings are also dated 1904, including “A Landscape.” That year Hirszenberg’s work was mentioned in an article by Antoni Potocki dedicated to the Polish artists’ colony in Paris, published in No. 8/9 of the magazine Sztuka. Leon became close to the circle of artists associated with Sztuka, along with Antoni Potocki, sculptor Bolesław Biegas and the Jewish poet, playwright and art critic Mieczysław Goldberg. In 1904-1910, Leon Hirszenberg painted “Breton Women on the Sea Shore” (approx. 1905 to 1910) and “A Courtyard in Brittany” (1909). Leon also exhibited his works at the Salon des Independents for two years in a row, giving as his Parisian address the famous international colony La Ruche (2 passage de Dantzig). In 1911. Featured there were six of his works: “3037. Vieux Camarades/Old Companions,” “3038. Retour/The Return,” “3039. Réflexion/Deep in Thought,” “3034. Promenade/A Walk,” “3041. Tête de femme/A Woman’s Head,” and “3042. Portrait.” A year later, also at the Salon, he showed three more works: “1592. Les Ages heureux / Happy Times,” “11593. Idylle / Idyll,” and “1594. Passage/A Landscape.”
According to most publications date Leon Hirszenberg’s death at 1912 or 1915. However, new documents have been found recently that seem to indicate that he in fact died in Paris (following a serious eye condition) in 1932 or later. 
Leon Hirszenberg’s career and his fate have still not been sufficiently explored. Early on, the artist seems to have been inspired by his brother’s peer, Olga Boznańska, whom he probably met in Munich, as his painting “Girl with a Cat” (1896; Art Museum in Łódź) indicates. With time, his travels to Brittany brought him closer to Gauguin’s synthetism, albeit filtered through Ślewiński’s aesthetics. However, the promising artist, with such interesting such achievement, as “The Fishermen,” suddenly disappeared from the artistic horizon. Most likely the reason was his failing health. Early on in his career, his works were close to realism, mainly consisting of genre painting. He painted atmospheric landscapes, still lifes, portraits of fishermen and genre scenes. Evident in his works from that period is the influence of Paul Gauguin and the Pont-Aven school. Few of the artist's works have survived. Despite fundamental differences in the themes and the style of painting, the works of the two brothers – Leon and Samuel – are often confused.

