Samuel Hirszenberg, the most famous of the three brothers, was born to a traditional Jewish family on 10 August 1865 in Łódź. He was the eldest son of ten children of Sura and Dawid – an artistically gifted master weaver, laborer in a Łódź weaving mill. His sister married the famous sculptor Henryk Glicenstein, for whom the work of his brother-in-law Samuel was a great inspiration. Samule Hirszenberg decided to pursue a career in arts against his father’s will, thanks to the financial support of a patron and protector of the young talent, a friend of the family, physician and director of the Poznański Hospital in Łódź, Dr. Maksymilian Cohn. First, he studied at the School of Crafts in Łódź (1876-1880). Later, at the age of 15, he enrolled at the Krakow School of Fine Arts (in the studios of Feliks Szynalewski, Izydor Jabloński and Władysław Łuszczkiewicz), where he was heavily influenced by the realistic painting style of Jan Matejko. A scholarship enabled him to continue his studies at the Royal Academy of Fine Arts in Munich, where he trained under Alexander Wagner in 1883-1889. In 1889, along with Maurycy Trębacz, he went to study at the Académie Colarossi in Paris, where he completed his artistic education. He stayed abroad until 1892 thanks to a modest stipend he received from Izrael Poznański. After graduating in 1892, he returned to Łódź, where he became involved with the local artistic circles; he was one of the founders of a small artistic colony, comprised of artists such as Natan Altman, Leopold Pilichowski, Henryk Glicenstein and Maurycy Trębacz. He travelled extensively, visiting places such as Rome, Brittany and Munich. He was friends with Aleksander Sochaczewski, Marian Wawrzeniecki, Olga Boznańska and Edward Okuń. In 1904, he moved to Krakow, where he became friends with Martin Buber, finding himself more and more drawn to the Zionist ideas. In 1907, he went to Palestine at the invitation of Boris Schatz in order to take up a teaching position at the new (founded in 1906), pioneering School of Arts ”Bezalel.” His career was interrupted by his premature death in Jerusalem in 1908.
Over the course of his short life, he worked in Łódź (on commission  for the industrial bourgeoisie), as well as in Munich, Paris, Krakow, Italy and Palestine. His lauded and award-winning works have powerful appeal – the extensive oeuvre of the artist consists of realistic and symbolic images, the most famous of which were inspired by Jewish history and tradition. “The Wandering Jew” (marking the first instance in the history of art when the theme of crucifixion was used to represent the suffering of the Jews), “At Nightfall in the Synagogue,” a symbolic composition titled “Urania” (inspired by Artur Grottger’s drawing from his “War” series), “Spinoza Accursed,” “Jewish Cemetery,” “Yeshiva,” “At the Wailing Wall,” “The Synagogue” and “The Black Banner” are the most outstanding examples of Jewish painting. Hirszenberg also painted monumental, dark compositions based on themes from literature (“Uriel Acosta and Spinoza,” “Young Spinoza”).
The artist made his debut at the Zachęta gallery in 1885, winning critical acclaim at the tender age of 20. He featured his works frequently and regularly, for example at the Society of Friends of Fine Arts in Krakow, Society for the Encouragement of Fine Arts in Warsaw, as well as galleries in Lviv and Łódź, earning critical praise and awards at exhibitions in Berlin (1891), Munich and Paris, Zachęta (1895) and the Universal Exhibition in Paris (1900). Most of his works were destroyed during the Second World War, and those that survived are dispersed in private collections. In the Polish, European and Jewish culture, he was particularly well-known for his three most famous paintings: “The Wandering Jew” (1899), “The Emigrants /The Exiled (Golus)” and “The Black Banner/Black Flag” (1905). Painted in Łódź, these symbolic and expressive compositions addressed the entirety of social and national events 1905 and were widely circulated on postcards and reproductions in many European countries and Israel. Samuel Hirszenberg’s early works are evocative of the Munich realistic painting, clearly reminiscent of the painting style of Leopold Horowitz, Isadore Kaufmann and Maurycy Gottlieb. Inspired by the French school he gradually drifted towards Impressionism, and then Symbolism and Expressionism in subsequent years. His multi-dimensional oeuvre constantly evolved as a result of the changes that were taking place in European painting. Hirszenberg was concerned about the ideology, religion and everyday life of his people, therefore the themes he addressed in his works stemmed from his interest in philosophy, as well as an in-depth study of the lives and minds of the reformers of Jewish community, namely Uriel Acosta and Benedict Spinoza. The artist was particularly interested in their postulates of the cultural emancipation of Jews - while feasible in the late nineteenth century, before the reforms such attempts had inevitably resulted in the would-be reformer being cursed, anathematized and forced to abandon his native group. The paintings “Yeshiva (A Talmudic Feast)” and “Uriel Acosta and a Young Spinoza” criticize the custom of forcing students to learn Talmud by heart, as the artist believed that only through intellect and understanding of God’s unity with nature (as Spinoza preached) can the highest degree of knowledge be achieved. Hirszenberg’s deistic approach to nature as created by God and governed by immutable laws was based on scientific achievements, including the works of Georges-Louis Leclerc de Buffon: “Natural History” and “Discourse on Style.” He cited his adage that “Genius is nothing but a great aptitude for patience.” Hirszenberg also addressed the persecutions and pogroms against the Jews, portrayed Jewish rituals and traditions, and illustrated the slow process of assimilation. At the same time, with such philosophical compositions as “Spinoza Accursed,” he addressed the mood within the Jewish community, reminding viewers of the internal threats and religious fanatics eager to cast stones. Making use of his excellent technique, he also painted impressionist portraits and landscapes, decorative compositions and, occasionally, nudes. Sometimes he featured Christian (“The Prophet,” “Head of Christ”) and social (“Golus”) themes. He also painted small genre scenes and landscapes (“The Pond in Lisowice”), portraits (“Portrait of Teresa Silberstein of Łódź,” “Portrait of Abraham Neuman with a Palette”). He successfully employed the impressionist style in “A Lady with a Red Umbrella”), easily conveying the vibration of light and a multitude of colors and tones. Using his experience with monumental forms, he created panneaux murals. During his stay in Palestine, he painted landscapes of Jerusalem and the surrounding areas in light, calm colors, as well as portraits of unique characters – residents of Palestine. In particular the landscapes he painted in France, Italy, Poland and Palestine reveal his talent as a keen observer and worshipper of nature, free from all commitment and political pressures. 
